.. index:: pair: page; Best practices guide
.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide:

Best practices guide
====================

GeNN generates code according to the network model defined by the user, and allows users to include the generated code in their programs as they want. Here we provide a guideline to setup GeNN and use generated functions. We recommend users to also have a look at the :ref:`Examples <doxid-d9/d61/Examples>`, and to follow the tutorials :ref:`Tutorial 1 <doxid-d5/dbb/Tutorial1>` and :ref:`Tutorial 2 <doxid-dc/d7e/Tutorial2>`.



.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1CreateAndSimulate:

Creating and simulating a network model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The user is first expected to create an object of class :ref:`ModelSpec <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec>` by creating the function modelDefinition() which includes calls to following methods:

* :ref:`ModelSpec::setDT() <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1a329236a3b07044b82bfda5b4f741d8e1>`;

* :ref:`ModelSpec::setName() <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1ada1aff7a94eeb36dff721f09d5cf94b4>`;

Then add neuron populations by:

* :ref:`ModelSpec::addNeuronPopulation() <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1a0b765be273f3c6cec15092d7dbfdd52b>`;

for each neuron population. Add synapse populations by:

* :ref:`ModelSpec::addSynapsePopulation() <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1abd4e9128a5d4f5f993907134218af0c2>`;

for each synapse population.

Other optional functions are explained in :ref:`ModelSpec <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec>` class reference. At the end the function should look like this:

.. ref-code-block:: cpp

	void modelDefinition(:ref:`ModelSpec <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec>` &model) {
	  model.:ref:`setDT <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1a329236a3b07044b82bfda5b4f741d8e1>`(0.5);
	  model.:ref:`setName <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1ada1aff7a94eeb36dff721f09d5cf94b4>`("YourModelName");
	  model.:ref:`addNeuronPopulation <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1a0b765be273f3c6cec15092d7dbfdd52b>`(...);
	  ...
	  model.:ref:`addSynapsePopulation <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec_1abd4e9128a5d4f5f993907134218af0c2>`(...);
	  ...
	}

``modelSpec.h`` should be included in the file where this function is defined.

This function will be called by generateALL.cc to create corresponding CPU and GPU simulation codes under the <YourModelName>_CODE directory.

These functions can then be used in a .cc file which runs the simulation. This file should include <YourModelName>_CODE/definitions.h. Generated code differ from one model to the other, but core functions are the same and they should be called in correct order. First, the following variables should be defined and initialized:

* :ref:`ModelSpec <doxid-da/dfd/classModelSpec>` model // initialized by calling modelDefinition(model)

* Array containing current input (if any)

Any variables marked as unintialised using the ``:ref:`uninitialisedVar() <doxid-dc/de1/modelSpec_8h_1a6bd7d3c3ead0a4d0ffb15d2a4c67d043>``` function or sparse connectivity not initialised using a snippet must be initialised by the user between calls to ``initialize()`` and ``initializeSparse()``. Core functions generated by GeNN to be included in the user code include:

* ``allocateMem()``

* ``initialize()``

* ``initializeSparse()``

* ``push<neuron or synapse name>StateToDevice()``

* ``pull<neuron or synapse name>StateFromDevice()``

* ``push<neuron name>SpikesToDevice()``

* ``pull<neuron name>SpikesFromDevice()``

* ``push<neuron name>SpikesEventsToDevice()``

* ``pull<neuron name>SpikesEventsFromDevice()``

* ``push<neuron name>SpikeTimesToDevice()``

* ``pull<neuron name>SpikeTimesFromDevice()``

* ``push<neuron name>CurrentSpikesToDevice()``

* ``pull<neuron name>CurrentSpikesFromDevice()``

* ``push<neuron name>CurrentSpikesEventsToDevice()``

* ``pull<neuron name>CurrentSpikesEventsFromDevice()``

* ``pull<synapse name>ConnectivityFromDevice()``

* ``push<synapse name>ConnectivityToDevice()``

* ``pull<var name><neuron or synapse name>FromDevice()``

* ``push<var name><neuron or synapse name>ToDevice()``

* ``copyStateToDevice()``

* ``copyStateFromDevice()``

* ``copyCurrentSpikesFromDevice()``

* ``copyCurrentSpikesEventsFromDevice()``

* ``stepTime()``

* ``freeMem()``

You can use the ``push<neuron or synapse name>StateToDevice()`` to copy from the host to the GPU. At the end of your simulation, if you want to access the variables you need to copy them back from the device using the ``pull<neuron or synapse name>StateFromDevice()`` function or one of the more fine-grained functions listed above. **Copying elements between the GPU and the host memory is very costly in terms of performance and should only be done when needed and the amount of data being copied should be minimized.**



.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1extraGlobalParamSim:

Extra Global Parameters
-----------------------

If extra global parameters have a "scalar" type such as ``float`` they can be set directly from simulation code. For example the extra global parameter "reward" of population "Pop" could be set with:

.. ref-code-block:: cpp

	rewardPop = 5.0f;

However, if extra global parameters have a pointer type such as ``float*``, GeNN generates additional functions to allocate, free and copy these variables between host and device:

* ``allocate<var name><neuron or synapse name>``

* ``free<var name><neuron or synapse name>``

* ``push<var name><neuron or synapse name>ToDevice``

* ``pull<var name><neuron or synapse name>FromDevice`` These operate in much the same manner as the functions for interacting with standard variables described above but the allocate, push and pull functions all take a "count" parameter specifying how many entries the extra global parameter array should be.







.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1floatPrecision:

Floating point precision
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Double precision floating point numbers are supported by devices with compute capability 1.3 or higher. If you have an older GPU, you need to use single precision floating point in your models and simulation.

GPUs are designed to work better with single precision while double precision is the standard for CPUs. This difference should be kept in mind while comparing performance.

While setting up the network for GeNN, double precision floating point numbers are used as this part is done on the CPU. For the simulation, GeNN lets users choose between single or double precision. Overall, new variables in the generated code are defined with the precision specified by ModelSpec::setPrecision(unsigned int), providing GENN_FLOAT or GENN_DOUBLE as argument. GENN_FLOAT is the default value. The keyword ``scalar`` can be used in the user-defined model codes for a variable that could either be single or double precision. This keyword is detected at code generation and substituted with "float" or "double" according to the precision set by ModelSpec::setPrecision(unsigned int).

There may be ambiguities in arithmetic operations using explicit numbers. Standard C compilers presume that any number defined as "X" is an integer and any number defined as "X.Y" is a double. Make sure to use the same precision in your operations in order to avoid performance loss.





.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1ListOfVariables:

Working with variables in GeNN
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1modelVars:

Model variables
---------------

User-defined model variables originate from classes derived off the :ref:`NeuronModels::Base <doxid-d7/dad/classNeuronModels_1_1Base>`, :ref:`WeightUpdateModels::Base <doxid-d2/d05/classWeightUpdateModels_1_1Base>` or :ref:`PostsynapticModels::Base <doxid-d1/d3a/classPostsynapticModels_1_1Base>` classes. The name of model variable is defined in the model type, i.e. with a statement such as

.. ref-code-block:: cpp

	:ref:`SET_VARS <doxid-d4/d13/models_8h_1a3025b9fc844fccdf8cc2b51ef4a6e0aa>`({{"V", "scalar"}});

When a neuron or synapse population using this model is added to the model, the full GeNN name of the variable will be obtained by concatenating the variable name with the name of the population. For example if we a add a population called ``Pop`` using a model which contains our ``V`` variable, a variable ``VPop`` of type ``scalar*`` will be available in the global namespace of the simulation program. GeNN will pre-allocate this C array to the correct size of elements corresponding to the size of the neuron population. GeNN will also free these variables when the provided function ``freeMem()`` is called. Users can otherwise manipulate these variable arrays as they wish. For convenience, GeNN provides functions to copy each state variable from the device into host memory and vice versa e.g. ``pullVPopFromDevice()`` and ``pushVPoptoDevice()``. Alternatively, all state variables associated with a population can be copied using a single call E.g.

.. ref-code-block:: cpp

	pullPopStateFromDevice();

These conventions also apply to the the variables of postsynaptic and weight update models. Be aware that the above naming conventions do assume that variables from the weightupdate models and the postSynModels that are used together in a synapse population are unique. If both the weightupdate model and the postSynModel have a variable of the same name, the behaviour is undefined.





.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1predefinedVars:

Built-in Variables in GeNN
--------------------------

GeNN has no explicitly hard-coded synapse and neuron variables. Users are free to name the variable of their models as they want. However, there are some reserved variables that are used for intermediary calculations and communication between different parts of the generated code. They can be used in the user defined code but no other variables should be defined with these names.

* ``DT`` : Time step (typically in ms) for simulation; Neuron integration can be done in multiple sub-steps inside the neuron model for numerical stability (see Traub-Miles and Izhikevich neuron model variations in :ref:`Neuron models <doxid-de/ded/sectNeuronModels>`).

* ``inSyn:`` This is an intermediary synapse variable which contains the summed input into a postsynaptic neuron (originating from the ``addtoinSyn`` variables of the incoming synapses) .

* ``Isyn`` : This is a local variable which contains the (summed) input current to a neuron. It is typically the sum of any explicit current input and all synaptic inputs. The way its value is calculated during the update of the postsynaptic neuron is defined by the code provided in the postsynaptic model. For example, the standard :ref:`PostsynapticModels::ExpCond <doxid-d5/d27/classPostsynapticModels_1_1ExpCond>` postsynaptic model defines
  
  .. ref-code-block:: cpp
  
  	:ref:`SET_APPLY_INPUT_CODE <doxid-d8/d47/postsynapticModels_8h_1a41d7141aeae91e2840c2629106b6a3b1>`("$(Isyn) += $(inSyn)*($(E)-$(V))");
  
  which implements a conductance based synapse in which the postsynaptic current is given by :math:`I_{\rm syn}= g*s*(V_{\rm rev}-V_{\rm post})`.

The value resulting from the current converter code is assigned to ``Isyn`` and can then be used in neuron sim code like so:

.. ref-code-block:: cpp

	$(V)+= (-$(V)+$(Isyn))*DT

* ``sT`` : This is a neuron variable containing the last spike time of each neuron and is automatically generated for pre and postsynaptic neuron groups if they are connected using a synapse population with a weight update model that has :ref:`SET_NEEDS_PRE_SPIKE_TIME(true) <doxid-dc/dab/weightUpdateModels_8h_1ad06378df00a5d9ffe4068ba2c01b09ab>` or :ref:`SET_NEEDS_POST_SPIKE_TIME(true) <doxid-dc/dab/weightUpdateModels_8h_1a4f3e008922887cba8cfafc0fb0e53965>` set.

In addition to these variables, neuron variables can be referred to in the synapse models by calling $(<neuronVarName>_pre) for the presynaptic neuron population, and $(<neuronVarName>_post) for the postsynaptic population. For example, $(sT_pre), $(sT_post), $(V_pre), etc.







.. _doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide_1Debugging:

Debugging suggestions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In Linux, users can call ``cuda-gdb`` to debug on the GPU. Example projects in the ``userproject`` directory come with a flag to enable debugging (debug). genn-buildmodel.sh has a debug flag (-d) to generate debugging data. If you are executing a project with debugging on, the code will be compiled with -g -G flags. In CPU mode the executable will be run in gdb, and in GPU mode it will be run in cuda-gdb in tui mode.

Do not forget to switch debugging flags -g and -G off after debugging is complete as they may negatively affect performance.

On Mac, some versions of ``clang`` aren't supported by the CUDA toolkit. This is a recurring problem on Fedora as well, where CUDA doesn't keep up with GCC releases. You can either hack the CUDA header which checks compiler versions - ``cuda/include/host_config.h`` - or just use an older XCode version (6.4 works fine).

On Windows models can also be debugged and developed by opening the sln file used to build the model in Visual Studio. From here files can be added to the project, build settings can be adjusted and the full suite of Visual Studio debugging and profiling tools can be used. When opening the models in the ``userproject`` directory in Visual Studio, right-click on the project in the solution explorer, select 'Properties'. Then, making sure the desired configuration is selected, navigate to 'Debugging' under 'Configuration Properties', set the 'Working Directory' to '..' and the 'Command Arguments' to match those passed to genn-buildmodel e.g. 'outdir' to use an output directory called outdir.

:ref:`Previous <doxid-dc/d7e/Tutorial2>` \| :ref:`Top <doxid-d0/da6/UserGuide>` \| :ref:`Next <doxid-dd/d51/Credits>`

